---
layout: page
exclude: true
title: S3
---

S3 stands for **simple storage service**. It is one of AWS's longest serving products and is defined by Amazon as a "secure, durable, highly-scalable object storage" system.

S3 is used for storing **flat files** e.g. text, video, images - files that do not change periodically and have already been encoded. This is not suitable for database storage.

S3 is an **object based storage system**:

- It is used for storing files and content and allows you to upload files.
- Files can be between 0 bytes and 5 terabytes in size.
- Storage is unlimited

This is in contrast to a **block based storage system** which is used for installing an operating systems or databases etc.

S3 is a **global service** and changes your region to `global` when selected.

You can **access the S3 service** by going to to `Services -> Storage -> S3`.

When **creating an S3 bucket** you must give it a `DNS compliant name` which simply means the bucket must be valid as a web url.

You can **make your buckets publicly available** by unchecking `Block all public access` when creating your bucket.

Individual files that you add to your bucket are **not public by default**, even if the bucket they reside in *is* public.

You can **make a file public** by:

1. Checking the file in the bucket file list.
2. Going to `Actions -> Make Public`

You can also **make a file public** by:

1. Checking the file in the bucket file list
2. Select `Permissions` from the right side menu for the file
3. Checking the circle under `Everyone`
4. Checking `Read Object` and clicking `Save`

You can **change your object's storage class** (i.e. Intelligent-Tiering, Glacier etc.) by:

1. Checking the file in the bucket file list
2. Select `Properties` from the right side menu for the file
3. Select `Storage Class` from the available panels.

You can **turn on transfer acceleration** for your bucket by:

1. Select `Properties` from the top of the Bucket menu
2. Scroll down to the `Advanced Settings`
3. Select `Transfer Acceleration` from the available panels. *You can test the comparative speed of transfer acceleration for your bucket here which will upload files to different regions and then show a side by side of different speeds as percentages*


## Features

- Tiered storage
- Lifecycle Management
- Versioning
- Encryption
- Secure data using **Access Control Lists** and **Bucket Policies**.

## Buckets

S3 files are **stored in buckets** which are like folders in the cloud. Buckets can be viewed globally but **bucket storage is localised to individual regions**.

When creating a new bucket, the **bucket name must be unique globally** across the entire AWS S3 storage system they use a **universal shared namespace**. Buckets are available at URL in the format `https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/<bucket name>` which adds a unique DNS entry to amazon for access to the bucket. This is why the bucket namespace has to be globally unique.

When you **successfully upload a file** to S3 you will receive a status code `200` which allows you to test if an upload was successful or not.

You can **change object permissions for an entire bucket** by going to the `Permissions` tab of the bucket and then editing the `Bucket Policy` section. These policies are defined in `JSON`.

You will **need to replace the resource location** with whatever `ARN` you have on the page which points to the bucket you are editing *if* you are **using a bucket policy template**.

If you make everything in a bucket public you should see a warning in the buckets section showing `Access` as `Public`. You can **make a bucket public** after you have unchecked the `Block All Public Access` options.

### Hosting Static Content

You can **host the contents of a bucket as a static website** by going to `Properties -> Static Website Hosting -> Edit` and setting your `index` and `error` page HTML documents as entry points for your site. This will automatically root requests etc. and serve an error page if an extension is not known. 

Static S3 websites are **serverless** and **scale with demand**.

## Objects

S3 is a **key value based object store**.

An Object in S3 **consists of**:

- `Key`: The name of the object e.g. `menu.txt` or `funnycat.gif`
- `Value`: The data that makes up the object (as a sequence of bytes)
- `Version ID`
- `Metadata`

They also contain **subresources** consisting of:

- `Access Control Lists`
- `Torrent`

You can **make an object public** by selecting the object in your bucket's `Object` section and selecting `Make Public` from the `Actions` drop down.

You can **access an object** by clicking *into* the object in your bucket's `Object` section and clicking the `Object URL`.

## Data Consistency

There is **read after write consistency** for `PUT` on new objects. This means, as soon as you create a new object you will be able to read that data immediately.

There is **eventual consistency** for overwrite `PUT` and `DELETE` on existing objects. This means it can take some time for updates and deletes to propagate across the S3 system. After updating you may still be able to read the old version of a file and after deletion you may still be able to access a file for a period of time (up to a second).

## Reliability

S3 platform is **built for 99.99% availability**, however **Amazon only guarantee 99.9% availability**.

Amazon guarantee **11 x 9 durability of files** which is equivalent to **99.999999999%**. Durability describes you certain you can be that a file will not be lost once it is uploaded to S3, thus S3 is very reliable in this capacity.

## Security

### Access Control Lists

An **access control list** allows you to **create access rules on an individual file basis**. For example, only allowing certain users to access a file, this is a type of **IAM Policy**.

### Bucket Policies

**Bucket Policies** allow you to **create access rules for entire buckets** to a control the security of large sets of data.

### Object Policies

**Object Policies** allow you to **create access rules for individual files in a bucket** to a control the security of data.

## Cloudfront Access

You can **give a cloudfront user access to an S3**
`

## Storage Classes

Amazon offers several storage class options using S3. You find a breakdown of the options [here](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/storage-classes/).

You can **change the storage class of your objects** at **any time**.

### S3 Standard

The original S3 storage service.

- 99.99% Availability and 99x11% durability
- Stored redundantly across multiple devices
- Can survive loss of two facilities concurrently

### S3 IA

S3 - IA stands for **infrequently accessed** data which is data that you might only access every 2 -3 months.

- Designed for data that is not used often
- Allows for rapid access when needed (within milliseconds)
- Lower fee than S3 **but charges incurred for retrieval** of data.

### S3 One Zone IA

S3 One Zone IA is **similar to IA but limits data to a single availability zone**.

### S3 Intelligent Tiering

S3 Intelligent Tiering uses machine learning to automatically **optimise storage usage for the lowest cost based on how you use the stored files**. It will use some combination of the above options for thee optimisation to this end.

### S3 Glacier

- Used for storing files that are used very infrequently
- Costing is competitive with on-premises storage solutions
- **Retrieval times are configurable** for between minutes and hours for retrieval

### S3 Glacier Deep Archive

- Amazon's **lowest cost storage solution**.
- **Retrieval time takes 12 hours + from when file is requested.**

### S3 Outposts

Outpost users can now use S3 buckets as well.

### S3 RRS

- RRS stands for **reduced redundancy storage**
- Currently being phased out and will not be tested

## Charges

Charging for S3 is based on:

- Storage usage
- Requests made
- Storage Management usage
- Data transfer usage
- Transfer Acceleration usage
- Cross Region Replication usage

## Transfer Acceleration

**Transfer Acceleration** is used for **speeding up and securing long distance file transfers between users and an S3 bucket**. This is **achieved by using Amazon's CloudFront edge locations** which are a network of globally distributed centers that extend Amazon's internal network.

For example, if a user in Australia is trying to upload a file to an S3 bucket in London. Transfer Acceleration will allow them to upload the file directly to a CloudFront edge location in Australia (or whatever is nearest to them) this will then send that file directly across the world to the London S3 storage via Amazon's internal network (no longer over the public internet) which supports an optimised network that runs very fast.

## Cross Region Replication

**Cross Region Replication** allows for the **replicated storage of files across different regions** when your primary S3 bucket changes. Changes will be persisted to different regions allowing for disaster recovery.

## Encryption

You can **change the encryption of your objects** at **any time**.

## SDK

### Javascript

[Link](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-javascript/v2/developer-guide/s3-example-creating-buckets.html) to the basics of the Javascript S3 SDK.

You can **access S3 specific scripting functions** using the `S3` function on the `AWS` object.
```js
var AWS = require('aws-sdk'); 
var s3 = new AWS.S3();
```

You can **access objects from S3** using the `getObjects` method on the `S3` object. This is an asynchronous function that takes an object with a `Bucket` property that takes the globally unique name of the bucket, and a `Key` property which is a path to the object within the bucket that you want to access. 

You **must convert the result of `getObjects` into a promise** to be able to handle it with `await` or other asynchronous protocols.
```js
const getS3Object = async () {
  const params {
    Bucket: "my-buckets-name",
    Key: "file.txt"
  };
  const data = s3.getObjects(params).promise();
  // destructure data here to get file contents back
}
```










<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTk0NTk4NTE0LDc0OTUzMDk3NiwyMTQzNT
k1Nzk5LC0xMDY3NTQ3ODQ5LC00MjYyMDY4MzYsLTE3ODA0MzE0
NTcsMzcxNDQ5Nzc3LC0xMzIzNzYwNDEwLDg3MzE5NjUxMCwxNj
Y2OTgzMTUzLC0xNzY2OTQxNDQzLDEwNjUwMjE0MjQsLTg3ODE4
MDYxLDY0Nzc2MTM4LDIwODkzODMyMCwtOTQwNDg2MjE2LDE2OD
AwMTQ5OTYsLTIxMjI2NDU0MDQsLTE5MTE5ODMwN119
-->